welcome to engineering with rosie i've
recently watched veritasium's video on
the blackbird vehicle
it's a strange-looking thing that sort
of resembles a wind turbine on a go-kart
it's powered by the wind and yet it can
travel faster than the wind
to summarize in case you haven't seen
that video yet there is a cart with a
propeller on it and it's traveling
downwind
the wheels of the cart turn the
propeller which creates thrust that
pushes the cart along
now if you find that hard to believe
then you're not the only one
a ucla physics professor has actually
bet
veritasium aka derek 10 000 us dollars
that traveling downwind faster than the
wind is not possible
there's a contract in everything and the
contract was witnessed by
neil degrassi tyson bill nye and sean
carroll so
some pretty big names and science there
so when i watched the video for like a
week afterwards my
brain actually hurt as i grappled with
the physics involved
and i wanted to make this video to share
the extra steps that i use to understand
how it works so for me
i never had a problem believing that it
was possible for such a cart to work
because i know that high performance
sailboats tack
both upwind and downwind much faster
than the wind and
not only can the sailboat sail faster
than the wind
but its velocity component in the
direction of the wind can be much faster
than the wind
i also know that there is an immense
amount of power in the wind since i've
worked in the wind energy industry for
the last decade
i mean a turbine the size of the
propeller on the car could
definitely easily generate enough power
to run a go-kart so it didn't
seem like a conceptual leap to me but
what i didn't understand was how it
worked and why it doesn't violate the
laws of thermodynamics
so that's what i'm going to show you in
this video including a conceptual design
spreadsheet model that i made to play
around with all the design parameters
and see how
they relate to each other so i will
start with
explanations in words and i will
gradually add maths to it as we progress
and i will put bookmarks in the
description so you can use those to jump
around in the order that makes sense to
you
and you will also find a bonus analogy
at the very end so keep watching for
that
okay i'm going to start with the cart
already moving because the way it works
when it's just getting started is
totally different to how it works when
it gets some speed and i think that that
adds extra confusion
so here's our cart already moving along
the ground there
is some wind moving in the same
direction as the cart
the wheels are turning they're connected
to the propeller via a
chain and that is causing the propeller
to rotate
it is just a normal propeller design
like you'd see on a model aeroplane or
whatever only it's a lot bigger
and the way that a propeller works is
that when you rotate it it accelerates
air through the rotor and generates a
thrust force
so i'll get further into the
aerodynamics and how the thrust is
created later
but conceptually it basically pushes the
air backwards
in the same way as like if you were
riding a bike in traffic
you could push off a car side mirror to
make yourself go faster
i wouldn't recommend that because
drivers do get very angry when cyclists
do stuff like that but you can
imagine that even if the car is moving
you can move faster than the car by
pushing off it
in the same way the propeller can move
faster than the
air that it's pushing on so the
propeller's thrust pushes the cart along
and as long as the wheels don't slip on
the ground they will rotate as the cart
moves forward
and since they're connected via a chain
to the propeller
they turn the propeller so we have
thrust from the propeller moving the
card forward
minus some drag and frictional forces
and as long as we're getting enough
power from the wheels to
power the cart's forward motion the
wheels will keep turning the prop and
the thrust for the prop makes the cart
go forward
so far so good or maybe not does this
sound like i'm saying the wheels power
the prop and then the pro
powers the wheels so not quite
the wheels turn the prop but they don't
power it remember the car
is not a closed system the ground and or
the wind are moving by constantly
but what about when they're traveling
exactly at wind speed so they see
no relative wind speed at all well at
that point there's no motion
of the car relative to the wind but
there is motion relative to the ground
the wheels are turning so the prop is
turning so it's generating thrust
it might help to think of it not being
as wind powered but rather being powered
by the difference between the wind speed
and the ground speed so at this point
you might be wondering
why don't the wheels put more drag on
the propeller than it needs to move
forward
and this is a question that i need to
answer with maths and aerodynamics so
i will come back to that later all right
so
what about the energy balance it's all
well and good to say that energy comes
from the wind
but how since the wind's energy is due
to the kinetic energy of all the moving
air particles
if we're extracting energy from the wind
the wind must slow down
but we also know that the propeller
works by accelerating air across the
rotor
so it must speed up it's a paradox
except it's not it's all just a matter
of perspective
from the perspective of someone standing
on the ground the air slows down across
the propeller and from the perspective
of the cart driver
the air speeds up across the propeller
and
it sounds like a paradox but it's not if
we go through with some very simple
numbers we can show that there's nothing
weird going on here
so let's say i'm driving the cart moving
at 12 meters per second relative to the
ground and i have a 10 meter per second
tailwind relative to the ground
so i see a two meter per second headwind
and the propeller accelerates air
through its rotor to let's say
four meters per second so the air's
accelerated from two to four meters per
second and so as a result there will be
a thrust force
from my reference point in the cart it's
all very easy to understand
but now let's step outside the cart onto
the ground so
now we feel a tailwind of 10 meters per
second and we see the cart moving away
at 12 meters per second relative to us
so
we need to subtract that 12 meters per
second from
what the car driver experienced to
translate it to what we're seeing
so the car driver's two meters per
second headwind minus the 12 meters per
second cut speed is a 10 meters per
second tailwind like we expect
and the cart drivers 4 meters per second
air behind the
prop minus 12 meters per second is an
eight meters per second tailwind
slower than the wind on the other side
of the cart because some
energy has been extracted from e the
frame the wind was accelerated
two meters per second to the left so
it's accelerated by two meters per
second in the cart frame
but decelerated by two meters per second
in the ground frame
we get more thrust from the prop than we
impose drag on the wheels
since the wheels are moving over the
ground faster than the prop
is moving through the air just like a
lever we trade a small force
over a large distance the wheels moving
over the ground
for a larger force over a smaller
distance the prop moving through the air
so that is the energy balance part the
paradox is simply galilean relativity
all right so in the previous sections i
assumed the cart is already moving
but of course in reality the cart starts
off stationary and has to somehow get up
to speed
and the way that happens is totally
different to the way that it accelerates
beyond the speed of the tailwind
so when the cart is at rest it has a 10
meter per second tailwind behind it
and that wind pushes on it and gets it
moving
it's just like riding a bike with the
wind behind you it'll push you along
even if you're not pedaling
but you'll never go faster than the wind
this way because the faster you go
the less wind there is from your
perspective so once the wheels are
turning the propeller starts turning
but not from the force of the wind or
the blades as if it were a wind turbine
instead of taking incoming wind and
converting it to rotation like a wind
turbine does
it takes rotation from the wheels and
converts it to faster wind out the back
any time the wheels are turning the prop
is turning
unless the chain falls off and if the
prop is turning
it's accelerating air behind it and
generating thrust
so once the cart and its propeller are
traveling close to the speed of wind
it's no longer
pushed by the wind on the back it gets
turned by the wheels
and then the speed that the propeller
sees its relative wind speed
is mostly from its rotational speed
which
can be much faster than the wind this
doesn't happen
all at once as we hit the wind speed the
torque from the prop
increases gradually from the moment the
wheels start turning
and the relative wind flows over the
propeller and creates a lift force
if the blades are 2.4 meters long and
rotating at just
1.1 revolutions per second then the
blade tips are moving at 17.2 meters per
second
which is 62 kilometers an hour or 38
miles per hour
so the blade sees a very fast wind speed
and furthermore the lift force that's
created by air moving over the aerofoil
is much stronger than the drag force
that pushed the back of the cart at the
start
so this is really similar to the reason
why modern wind turbines generate a lot
more power than the old-fashioned ones
okay let's talk more about how a
propeller works our propeller is just
like a rotating aeroplane wing or
a rotating sailboat as we saw in the
original video
when air flows over a profile at an
angle it causes high pressure on the
bottom and low pressure on the top
which results in a lift force acting
perpendicular to the airflow
and a drag force acting parallel and for
small angles of attack
the lift force is much larger than the
drag force
the lift force depends on the shape of
the airfoil
the angle of attack and the relative or
apparent wind speed
that's the airflow from the perspective
of the aerofoil to find the relative
wind speed for a cruising airplane
you would need to add the wind speed and
direction to the aeroplane's own speed
and direction
and the angle of attack is just the
angle of the wing relative to the
airflow
the lift force lifts the plane
perpendicular to the relative airflow
and the drag force slows it parallel to
the relative airflow
so now let's take this same analysis
onto the propeller which is slightly
more complicated because it's rotating
so the tip of the propeller is like a
wing but it's constrained to rotate
around an axis
so it sees relative wind that's a
combination of the
the wind that the cart sees and also the
speed due to its own rotation
the lift force created by the propeller
has a component that pushes the cart
along a thrust force
and a component that wants to slow the
rotation a torque
that's the force that needs to be
provided by the wheels turning
okay are you still with me now i'm going
to take you through
some maths and a spreadsheet model that
i made to go through a realistic
of kind of realistic conceptual design
so the propeller blade has a complicated
geometry it's twisted and tapered but we
can simplify the analysis by splitting
it into a lot of small pieces
each piece is small enough that the
pitch and cord don't change much over
any given piece
this is a blade element method and it's
not 100 accurate because i'm ignoring
things like the inflow
so we're going to overestimate thrust a
bit but it is a really great way to
visualize what's going on
so we calculate the apparent wind speed
and angle
the lift and drag forces in each section
when you add all these up you get the
thrust force for the whole propeller
and we need to multiply the tangential
force by the radius to get the torque
components
which will add up to the total torque so
i have tried to roughly copy the
blackbird design here
at the time that it set its record of
2.8 times wind speed
i have the actual propeller design and i
estimated the other relevant parameters
so there are a lot of parameters here
and you can definitely tweak them to get
a really wide variety of results
so i don't want you to think that i'm
trying to say that this spreadsheet
models proves that the cart
design works it only kind of shows how
it works and
what happens when we change various
aspects of the design or the conditions
a little bit
so when we take a look at a single
section
about three quarters of the way along
the blade you can see that the relative
wind speed that the aerofoil sees is
much faster than the tailwind
and the lift force is much much much
larger than the drag force because
we're using a really nice aerodynamic
profile
and even the component of the lift force
in the direction to push the cart along
the thrust component is a lot bigger
than the component that's trying to slow
the blade's rotation the
torque component that's the part that
needs to come from the wheels
so with these conditions my very simple
model gives
a gives me a balance between the power
from the prop and everything that's
slowing it down
including the drag from the wheels which
is what we would expect if the cart is
at its max speed
if there was excess power from the prop
we would speed up
and if there isn't enough power then
we'd slow down or
actually we would never have even gotten
to that speed
if we increase the cart speed the
rotational speed increases and the
relative wind speed moves closer to the
direction of rotation
decreasing the angle of attack so we
need to twist the blade to get the angle
of attack
more similar to what it was at the
slower cut speed
and that does increase the thrust
compared to the slower moving cart
however it also increases the drag and
now we don't have enough thrust from the
wheels to power the prop and overcome
the drag
if we could reduce the drag by
decreasing the frontal area say
we could increase our maximum speed all
right so now let's slow down to
wind speed so we have zero headwind but
the prop is still rotating because the
wheels are
now the airflow their propeller sees is
entirely from its rotation
we need to twist the blade back the
other way so the angle of attack gives
us good performance
and you can see that even with zero
tailwind or headwind
we still have power from the propeller
to accelerate the cart
there's nothing weird about that it's
just like an aeroplane's propeller being
used to get the plane started from
stationary in that case the motor will
make their propeller turn
and in our case we have the chain
connected to the wheels which are
turning because the cart is moving
okay and now finally slower again to
half of the wind speed
now most of the power to accelerate the
cart comes from the drag force
of the tailwind pushing on the cart the
propeller is still generating thrust but
not much so those were the analyses that
i used to understand the problem
but i have noticed that different people
find different explanations useful
so if none of this worked for you then i
suggest that you take a look at
this presentation that the designer rick
cavallaro made where
he runs through a whole bunch of other
analogies
i have been kind of embarrassingly
obsessed with this problem over the last
few weeks
i think it's a bit similar to that
physics brain teaser if you have a jet
plane on a treadmill that's moving the
exact same speed as the plane's wheels
can
it ever take off but in my opinion the
downwind faster than the wind brain
teaser is way cooler because
you can actually just make it to resolve
the problem
so i want to give a huge thank you to
rick cavallaro for not just coming up
with this design
and and tirelessly defending it on the
internet
but especially because he actually
followed through and made the thing
so i think you can learn a lot from
these kinds of fun engineering problems
and if you are interested in that sort
of thing then check out this video where
i made a functioning wind turbine
out of gingerbread please comment if
you've got another video idea for me
and if you want to become part of their
engineering with rosie community and
help shape the future direction of the
channel
then you could join us on patreon i've
also got lots of other videos about
more mainstream renewable energy
technologies on my channel
so take a look at them and i'll see you
in the next one
okay so here is your bonus analogy which
didn't really fit in the main video but
i wanted to include it anyway
did you notice that when the cart was
going faster we needed to
increase the pitch of the propeller and
when it was going slower we needed to
decrease it
this reminded me of another way that you
can think of a propeller
so instead of thinking of it like an
aeroplane wing like we just did
we can think of it like a screw when you
screw into a wall your
hand moves a lot more than the screw
does but it takes a smaller force from
your hand than it would to
you know just press the screw into the
wall if you increase the pitch on a
screw
you'll travel further into the wall with
each turn but it will be
harder and vice versa so a propeller
does something similar
it's easy to visualize if you imagine
the propeller working in
say hard butter instead of air since the
butter is so thick the propeller won't
slip and the propeller
just acts like a lever to turn a small
force over a large distance
into a large force over a small distance
so that's what happens as long as it's
not slipping
but now imagine the butter a little bit
softer and when you
turn the propeller you'll get some slip
between the propeller and the butter
so each term will move the propeller a
little bit less than pure geometry would
suggest
that's how it is with a propeller in air
each turn of the probe moves it forwards
a certain amount due to the geometry
and that maximum theoretical value
is reduced by the amount of slip